---
layout: post
title: Design Caveats
category: design
---


Strong medicines have contraindications. So, too, does this blog. There are a
few caveats, a few provisos, a few quid pro quos...


### Creativity is not repeatable

If it were repeatable, it wouldn't be creative, now would it? Every new
challenge of design and creation carries with it a unique context: different
issues, different restrictions, different tools, and different people. Every new
challenge requires a new approach.

However, there *are* significant parts of the creative process that are
repeatable. You might not be able write an instruction manual explaining how to
paint like Rembrandt, but you can write one that will tell you how to stretch a
canvas and prepare the paint.

With [these documents][1], I'm trying to draw a line that separates (1) the
purely creative portion of design from (2) the mechanical, repeatable processes
that most effectively support it. The former is wild, unique, and fragile. The
latter are its scaffolds, giving it a supportive structure and careful
protection from the vagaries of human nature.

If you don't draw a clearly defined line between the two halves, then people are
apt to get confused about what parts of the creative process belong to which
side. The creative contributors are likely to think that nothing is predictable
or repeatable, while their managers will be prone to think that everything
is. Neither extreme is realistic nor effective. In the worst case, you end up
with a situation where management is pushing designers to deliver their products
according to an unrealistically fixed schedule plotted out in ignorance many
months in advance, while the designers ignore the both the unrealistic dictates
of management *and* the good processes that would channel their otherwise
unguided creativity into an effective, problem-destroying force. Disaster
strikes, the team falls apart, and the project fails, and a monkey steals your
wallet.

No process is magic, but a good one can engage your mind, direct it to where its
efforts will be most effective, warn you away from common mistakes, and ease the
channels of communication between team, client, and boss.

Software engineering is notorious for being difficult to schedule. That is, it
is difficult to schedule *in the traditional way*, as though it were like
constructing a building with blueprints in hand and with a workforce that has
done the same job many times over. It is a fundamentally different type of
endeavor, meaning that it has to be approached with a fundamentally different
mindset.  It is not mechanically repeatable, so don't make your plans as though
it is.

Instead, you must understand that the creative process is driven by the
**generation and acquisition of information**. Your problem space is unique. You
need to methodically discover the qualities that make it unique. You can't
schedule that entire process of discovery in advance, since that would require
you to have already discovered those things. However, you *can* schedule each
successive stage of discovery as it happens, and track the results against your
ultimate goal. As long as we're doing genuinely creative work, that's the best
we need to hope for.

[1]: http://nerdflation.github.com/design/design-intro.html


### All (design) rules can be broken

A good set of rules saves you mental effort, since it's much more efficient to
refer to a set of rules and procedures rather than to evaluate an entire
decision tree every time you have to make a choice.

A set of rules also gives a team a common vocabulary and playbook, which -- once
agreed on -- reduces the amount of coordination and arguing you need in order to
work together.

But when it comes to actually *getting things done*, any rules that you, I, or
anyone else can come up with are in the end only guidelines set down at a time
and place other than here and now.

Every rule, guideline, or heuristic has two crucially important parts that often
are not explicitly stated:

1. The context in which it applies.
2. Its reason for being.

If you're going to follow a rule, make sure that it actually applies to the
context you find yourself in.

If you're going to bend or break a rule, make sure that you're not breaking it
for the very reason it was made in the first place.

Rules, processes, and procedures are there to make you and your team more
effective. More generally, they are there to protect and provide for the
desirable things that you as an individual, team, or company want. Keep your
eyes on the desirable things and on your end goal; use rules and processes as
helpful tools to get you there; adjust and adapt them whenever needed.
