---
layout: post
titile: design as navigation
---

### The Challenge

I read [The Design of Design][1] last weekend, and it got me thinking about my
own experiences with design and development, and how crude and uncivilized my
abilities seem compared to the shining ideal I harbor somewhere behind the left
manipulatory ventricle of the uppermost quadrant of my brain.

Enough neuroscience; let's cut to the chase. I want my software engineering
practice to be:

- Systematic
- Repeatable
- Efficient
- Effective


### Systematic

I want to have a system for getting things done, meaning that I can act swiftly
and with assurance. When working with a team, the entire team should share those
qualities. I don't want to burn a lot of time while flailing around or poking
about for the next thing to do.


### Repeatable

I want to be able to succeed consistently time and again, not just once in a
while by chance. I also want to be able to teach others to succeed in the same
way.


### Efficient

I don't want to waste a lot of time with useless process, writing docs, sitting
in meetings, and filling out spreadsheets that don't really add anything like
velocity or progress. Formal Methodologies and Processes tend to be bunkus, so
whatever system I have needs to be grounded in reality.


### Effective

The lightest-weight, most efficient process is not very useful if it doesn't
actually get you to where you want to be. A good system must be focused on
solving not just real problems, but also the right problems.


### Design as a Navigation Problem

I like metaphors.

After much thought, the metaphor that I think best describes the software
development process that I've experienced is that of *navigation through an
uncharted territory*.

When I start a new software project, I'm faced with a nearly infinite number of
possibilities. Design decisions combine with design decisions in a combinatorial
explosion.  If I'm working with others, the problem is compounded at the rate of
`O(n^2)`.

The requirements for the project are often vague and in flux, the technology new
or unfamiliar, and the team unseasoned. How do you deal with that? What do you
say to people who want a fixed schedule from you? How can you continue working
week after week and be confident that what you're doing is the right thing and
isn't going to waste?

Wouldn't you like a good map to guide you safely through all that dark and murky
jungle?  It's too bad no one's made a good map of your destination yet, so
you'll just have to start drawing one up yourself.

You can think of your project documents as a navigational aid. They are a set of
maps that represent your team's best collective knowledge of the terrain that
you are trying to explore. Of course, you aren't exploring just for the sake of
exploring; You're trying to get someplace in particular. You don't know
*exactly* where you're trying to get, but your client will know it when they see
it.

For the sake of my own sanity and productivity, I've started to put together my
own [software jungle mapping kit][2]. We'll see how it works out in practice.


[1]: http://nerdflation.github.com/design/2010/04/06/design-of-design.html
[2]: http://nerdflation.github.com/design/design-intro.html
